Hi, and welcome back!
In this video we're going to look at
a couple example codes from what we covered in the last one.
So I've created a new project in Python,
I've called it concurrency.
And we're gonna create a new file in here,
a new Python file that I'm gonna call threads.
Okay, by the way, this code is available
linked at the start of the section
which is on the GitHub for this course.
So, let's say you've got some code
that you want to run, like we saw earlier,
that asks the user for something
and then some other code does a complex calculation.
Okay, we're gonna have two functions:
the ask_user function,
this is going to get some input from the user,
and then is gonna construct this greeting
and finally just gonna print it out.
This is what this function does.
And as you know, this function here is going to wait
for the user to type something.
You know, okay?
These functions here, or these statements here,
are not going to wait for anything.
We'd say that this is a blocking operation,
an operation where your thread is blocked,
waiting for something to happen.
So these operations are what makes your threaded code slow.
OK, don't worry about that too much,
we're gonna explore this concept more and more
over the coming videos.
Then you're also going to have
a complex calculation function.
That is going to do something like
print started calculating,
and then it's going to do something that takes a while.
It's just gonna do something pretty silly,
x to the power of two for x in range 20 million.
Okay, twenty million?
Yeah, 20 million will do.
So this should take about six or seven seconds
in my machine.
It could take longer or shorter in your machine,
just tweak the number accordingly.
Okay, so it's gonna do that and that's it.
Then we're gonna do ask_user first
and then we're gonna do our complex calculation.
Now, of course we're not gonna know how long they take
unless we start timing them.
So, we're gonna import time at the top
and all I'm gonna do is, every function, time it.
So we're gonna do start = time.time()
and at the end we're gonna print ask_user.
ask_user time.time minus start.
Okay, same thing for the complex calculation.
Now, I'm also going to do this for the whole programme
so I'm gonna track how long the whole programme took.
Like that, okay?
Again, all that's happening here is
first of all, we start a timer,
then we launch the ask_user function
which starts a timer inside that function,
asks the user for some input, waits for the user to type,
constructs a new string and prints it out
and then it's gonna print the end time.
Then it's gonna launch the complex calculation function,
which is gonna start a timer,
print that it started calculating,
go through this list comprehension which is
a pretty massive one, and when it's done
it's going to print out.
Now the complex calculation took a certain amount of time.
And then at the very end, we're gonna print
that the single thread took some amount of time.
You know from all the Python development
we've been doing up to here,
that this is going to run from top to bottom.
You know, this is gonna run first,
then this one, our execution is gonna jump to here,
then here, then here, then it's gonna go back,
and then it's gonna go here and so forth.
This is a single thread.
This is our normal Python runtime.
We should write our code and it runs
from top to bottom because the thread is
this line of execution that
we've given to the CPU core to run.
So if we run this file, if we run threads,
the first thing it's gonna do,
is ask me my name, I'm gonna type it in,
oh, and I think I put one too few zero's here,
didn't take long enough.
And notice how the complex calculation
took point six seconds, I wanna take it,
I want it to take six seconds, so I'm gonna run it again.
So, that's my name and it took one point six seconds
to run the ask_user function and it started calculating.
It took about 6.4 seconds to run the complex calculation.
And in total, it adds these two together essentially,
plus a little bit of time, not a lot of it,
but a slight amount, the single thread took 8.14.
This slight amount of extra it takes is because,
you know, it has to jump from here to up to the function,
and that takes a couple nanoseconds.
So it's not gonna be an exact addition.
But you know, overall it's sequential.
First we run this, then we run this,
and the total is more or less the addition of both.
Now, okay.
Now, what we're gonna do is,
I'm going to collapse these functions.
This does not delete them, it just hides the codes in them
so it's a bit easier for you to see.
They're still doing the same thing, OK.
And what we're gonna do then
is, from threading import Thread.
So we're gonna import the thread class
from the threading module.
The threading module comes with Python,
you don't have to instal anything.
This gives us access to threads.
Whenever we create a thread,
that's gonna go to the operating system
and it's gonna ask the operating system
to give us a new thread and the operating system
is gonna be like, okay here you go, new thread,
you can run whatever you want in it.
And what we're gonna run
is we're gonna say thread one is Thread
and the target is going to be our complex calculation
Notice that the target is the complex calculation function
not the result of it.
So we're not gonna run the function here,
we're just gonna pass it into the thread
and when we ask the thread to start,
what it's gonna do is it's gonna
start a new thread running just this complex calculation.
And thread two is gonna be a new thread
where the target is the ask_user function.
Now OK, so now we have three threads:
a main thread, which is responsible
for running through the app,
a thread which is responsible
for running the complex calculation,
and another thread which is responsible
for running the ask_user function.
So we're gonna run these two at the same time
and we're gonna see what happens, okay?
The resolute is to do time.time, measure the start time,
thread.start, sorry thread1.start(), thread2.start().
Now these threads have started
and they are running at the same time as our main thread.
Okay, so now we have three threads running at the same time.
When we start this one,
the complex calculation function is running.
When we start this one, the ask_user function is running.
And also, our main thread which is responsible
for running this code, is also running.
So we have to tell our main thread to wait
for these two threads to finish.
The way we do that: thread1.join() and thread2.join().
This tells our main thread to wait
for thread one to finish and wait for thread two to finish.
Again, these here are what we would call
blocking operations because they're are making
this thread wait until something happens.
But in this case we want to do that
because we want to wait until the threads finish
before we can calculate the end time of the thread.
So we're gonna say two thread total time
is time.time minus start.
Now OK.
This is fine.
Don't worry about that yellow thing.
Let's run this again and see what happens.
What do you think is gonna happen?
Think about it before we continue.
Ask me for my name, took a couple of seconds to do that
and it starts calculating,
and in the end it's gonna take
more or less the same amount as before, eight seconds,
then it asks for my name again,
it took a bit longer now, just to type,
but notice how in total, it took 6.45 seconds
instead of 8.36 seconds.
But the complex calculation
took essentially the same amount of time.
The ask_user took even longer
but this is fine because in total,
we took as long as the longest running function
and that is because the ask_user function
didn't do anything except wait, okay?
The difference between these two times is
how much CPU the ask_user function needed
plus how long it took us to switch between the threads
in the CPU, in the processor in your course.
As you can see, not a lot of it.
In total, the two-threaded time took more or less
the same amount of time as your complex calculation
because your ask_user function
didn't actually need the CPU for anything.
It just created a new string, that's it.
So hopefully this makes sense,
this is what threads are for.
It's for reducing waiting time.
When you have a blocking operation like this input,
that is waiting, making your programme wait for something,
that's a good use for a thread.
If you have a function like this complex calculation,
using a thread is not such a great idea.
And here is a final example for you.
You know, threaded code,
I'm going to not use the ask_user function.
I'm going to use the complex calculation function again.
So now we will have two threads,
both running the complex calculation.
Separate instances of it, but they're both
going to calculate the same thing.
Okay, let's run this again.
It'll ask me for my name first because
that's the single-threaded code
and now let's see what happens with our calculation.
Remember, only one thread can run at a time, okay?
So you cannot run both at the same time
but we get started calculating twice
because this is two functions that are running,
each in one thread.
And now let's see what happens.
Notice how it's taking a while.
There you have it.
Complex calculation now took
double the amount of time to run
because they cannot run at the same time,
so the operating system was sort of
giving a little bit of time to one,
then pulling it out and giving
a little bit of time to the other,
then pulling it out and going back to the first one,
then going to the second one and so forth,
switching between the two
but all of them needed all that time in the CPU
to calculate things.
So in total, what you did is, you spread out the time
that each one was running.
And you sort of interspersed one with the other
continuously and in the end it took double the time.
If you had run these sequentially without threads,
it would actually be faster because
you wouldn't have to deal with
removing one thread and putting another one in.
So if you are doing things that require the CPU
all the time, don't use threads.
It's pointless in Python.
There are other ways of doing similar things
as we will learn, that could be better.
Now we're gonna go back to our ask_user function here,
again this code is available on the GitHub,
please download it, play around with it,
run it so you, you know, make a few changes,
have a think.
This stuff is complicated stuff, okay?
There's a reason why not many courses go into this
because it's difficult and I am expecting
you guys to come to the course Q&A
and ask questions and, you know, I'm here to help you out
if anything is unclear.
So please do use that resource.
I want you to leave this course knowing about this stuff.
So that's it for this video, thanks for joining me
in this one and I'll see you on the next one.